[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: There's
perhaps no more mysterious
and highly regarded tale of
man's valor than the story
of King Arthur and his knights.
Perhaps the mystery as to
who he was and where he lived
is a little closer
to being solved.
Caitlin Matthews
and her husband,
John, have spent decades
researching and hunting
down King Arthur.
What they have found
may be surprising to us.
This is a little
different rendition
of the story than a
lot of people who've
been watching the movies
and reading the books
and the fairy tales have
become accustomed to.
But nonetheless potent,
very potent, so welcome.
>>CAITLIN MATTHEWS:
Absolutely, thank you.
>> REGINA: It's funny.
We were all in the green
room a few moments ago
getting our makeup
touched up when
the royal wedding
between Harry and Meghan
is taking place, just
as they were walking up
the aisle about to take
their nuptials and all that.
And it's interesting because
the royal family itself is still
living off a lot of those
principles that were laid down
in the 12th and 13th century.
And we'll get to that
in the conversation
as to how that influenced
even modern day Britain.
But first of all
you and your husband
are award winning journalists.
You've written many, many books.
I'm glad to be with
you because I've
tried to get to you
a couple times when
I've been in England.
And this particular one, what
fascinated you to the extent
that you spent all
this time hunting down
what you have come to
find as close to the truth
as you can get at this point?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, I don't
think I'm looking for historical
truth and neither is John.
We've been really working
with the myth of King Arthur.
And of course that's really--
you know, myth for us
is our prime mainstream
that, as Celestius,
who was the--
a man who answers to
the Emperor Julian
said, "A myth is something
that's never happened
and is happening all the time."
>> REGINA: Yes,
that's very well put.
And it is.
It's this mythological notion of
valor, of courage, of chivalry
and so forth has certainly
withstood the test of time.
Because obviously there's
something within our own innate
beings that's craving
something of that, right?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, I think
the Arthurian legends,
in "The Complete King Arthur"
that John and I wrote,
we're really looking at how
Arthur has been perceived
through time.
Because every single
era has its own myth.
It has its own rendition.
It dresses it up.
It's the same if you look
at, say, films of Robin Hood.
The films of Robin
Hood all come--
the Errol Flynn one comes with
'30s makeup and hair styles.
So we know when it was, we
know the film was made then
because of the kind of makeup
and costume that it's in.
Yes, it sort of looks medieval.
But it also looks
'30s at the same time.
And I suppose that the
legend is the same.
And if, we know there
are lots of Robin Hood
films about to come
out at the moment.
And they'll all be of this era.
So that everyone will
have very grungy haircuts.
And they will be wearing leather
and various other things.
So they'll look like
goths on a bad day.
It'll be looking different.
So I think the
Arthurian legend looks
very different from
whichever perspective
you look at through time.
>> REGINA: Before we launch
into this incredible breadcrumb
trails of dates and times and
locations because everyone has
a different viewpoint.
And every author has a
different viewpoint on it.
Let's talk about what
you just mentioned,
this whole notion of how the
Arthurian legend is perceived
in a given era.
In the 21st century--
20th and 21st century for
sure it's through a lens,
certainly in the United States
and I think Europe as well,
of extreme romanticism.
And so what is it about where
we are as a civilization
evolving that takes
us to embrace it
on such an incredibly personal,
romantic, heartfelt level?
>> MATTHEWS: I don't know.
I think the romantic
thing really
came in in the 19th century.
And we're still with
it to some degree.
Guy Ritchie's latest
film was definitely
a shoot 'em up, beat 'em up.
Let's have some kung
fu in here as well.
So I think, I wouldn't
say that's necessarily
the Arthur of our time.
But of course, how Arthur starts
out is as a liberator at a time
when there's invasion.
So that's the Dark Age Arthur.
And I suppose that we're
nearer in time to that
now in terms of the themes
that are going on in our world
that people feel threatened.
Their boundaries are
shifting and changing.
Other people are trying to
come over those boundaries
from other places.
And so when you have
large movements of people,
you have a lot of paranoia.
You have a lot of difficulty
about, well, this is our place.
And they shouldn't come here.
So that's going on all over
the world at the moment,
isn't it, whichever
continent you look at.
>> REGINA: So when
people feel threatened,
they are under threat
on a personal level,
it brings out a different
characteristic, you're saying.
>> MATTHEWS: It does indeed.
So I think that we are nearer
in mythic terms to the dark ages
now than we are to
the romantic era.
I think the romantic era
of Arthur, I would predict,
is now passing
away a little bit.
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting,
there will be a lot of ladies
watching this, sad to hear this.
But we can hold it in our
hearts however we wish, right?
>> MATTHEWS: Indeed.
>> REGINA: So what
were your resources?
You took a couple of decades,
sifting through all of this,
to piece together a possible
origin of this myth, right?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, John's been
really working at this since he
was 15.
And he's 70 now.
>> REGINA: Oh my gosh, OK.
>> MATTHEWS: He's been at
that for a very long time.
My interest has always been
in the earlier legends.
So John does the medieval.
And I do the
slightly earlier end.
So together we make
a nice parabola.
>> REGINA: Yes, and so this
spans roughly 1,800 years
of history.
And we're looking
at a history that
leaves kind of like
Jesus and people
are trying to hunt
down the evidence
for his physical existence,
the very few physical clues.
>> MATTHEWS: We
have textual clues.
And we have
archaeological clues so
that the time when invasions
of Anglos and Saxons
started to come into Britain
in the fifth century,
we suddenly see the
Roman fortifications
and the Iron Age hill forts
are suddenly refortified.
So someone was organizing that.
Someone was saying, these
are the assets we have.
Let's dig in here and
keep up a good resistance.
>> REGINA: Yes, and let's
talk about society of the day.
Let's talk about what
happened when the Romans came.
And let's talk about how it
affected Britain and the people
and what the resistance was
like throughout Britain.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, when the
Romans left was the problem.
The Romans had been
here from, well,
they started coming in 55 BC.
But they made a
real good comeback
in the middle of
the first century.
And so they'd been here
organizing and administrating
and all those sorts of things.
So it was like suddenly
all that infrastructure
left at the beginning
of the fifth century.
And so--
>> REGINA: And they did a
wonderful job of laying down
infrastructure.
>> MATTHEWS: They certainly did.
>> REGINA: Aqueducts and
roads and a lot of technology.
>> MATTHEWS: Yeah, so yes,
so suddenly none of that was
there.
And obviously some
of it must have
continued, as it does in times
of war all over the place.
The people who were
position holders
would have continued
in those positions.
But then it would be,
well, who's leading us?
So that the tribal leaderships
began to come up again.
And it was those
tribal leaderships
that were really beginning
to make the difference
against the sudden, vast
incursions of people
who are coming here because
they wanted a new land.
They wanted farm
land they could farm.
But of course they had to fight
those that were here first.
So we think that Arthur was one
of those that stepped forward.
As one Arthurian
scholar said once,
if you took all the mentions
of Arthur out of the record,
there would be an
Arthur-shaped hole.
And it's the Arthur-shaped hole.
So it's a bit like the
excavations at Sutton Hoo that
found the Saxon kings.
The soil was not
good to hold bodies.
It kept the artifacts like the
gold and the metals and so on.
But everything else rotted away.
So what were left of
the gold on the metals,
that's all we have left
of this very early legend.
And it becomes important
in successive times
throughout history
that Arthur is
the great leader who
comes forward to do things
at particular times.
So for the British people he
becomes the great liberator.
But then of course we
get conquered severally.
We have the Normans coming in,
the ancestors of the queen.
>> REGINA: Right,
OK, but the thing is,
it is this throughout history.
Before we start drilling
down into places
and potential
tracking of clues, it
is this persistent rendering
of a heroic figure that pops up
at different, in
different centuries that
is captivating the heart
and the minds of the people.
And this, now this is a little
edgy place to go with it.
But it says in some
of the lineages
and the hermetic in
particular believes
that the entity known as Horus,
the great one of the horizon
that has this particularly
loving relationship
with the planet Earth,
would incarnate occasionally
or certainly whisper
his essence into many
of the great known
archetypal figures of wisdom,
teachers of the ages.
>> MATTHEWS: Like
Vishnu in India.
>> REGINA: Yes, like Vishnu--
would breathe itself
into these characters.
And the same characteristics,
the same history,
the same lore, the same
legend would pop up
in the lives of all of
these, these same people,
the same birthday,
the same virgin birth,
in the story of Jesus,
for example, that perhaps
as one entity kept touching
in with and inspiring,
reincarnating
humanly throughout.
Is it possible that
the Arthur figure
might be a similar
kind of valiant warrior
throughout history?
>> MATTHEWS: The Welsh
legends talk about that.
There's a very early
Welsh poem called
"The Stanzas of the Graves."
And it talks about
the graves of heroes.
And then it gets to Arthur.
And it says, not wise the
thought a grave for Arthur.
So we can't even think about
that because of course he's
not dead and buried.
>> REGINA: Yes, I get chills.
>> MATTHEWS: In the story he
goes to Avalon to be healed
of his wounds, which of course
is a later spin on the story,
but a medieval
spin on the story.
>> REGINA: But it means he
continues and continues.
>> MATTHEWS: But
he can come back.
So the first thing that the
Normans did was of course,
we said, we found his body
at Glastonbury Abbey, which
of course puts page
to all of that.
So it's, when that happens
in the 12th century, that's
a, that's saying, two
fingers to you Welsh people.
I'm so sorry.
Your liberator is never
going to come back
because we found his body, yes?
>> REGINA: Well, but at the
same time if what we're talking
about has truth in it and this
one lives again and again,
the once and future king, then
we may be talking about another
one of these incredibly potent
entities that has the ability
to appear when time is needed
among a group of people who
need such a leader at that time.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, I don't
think that we see incarnations
of Arthur in quite the same
way that we see incarnations
of Vishnu.
What we see is the
incarnation of the legend.
And the legend and
the myth are respun.
They're different.
So the conquest of Wales
and Scotland by Edward
the First, another ancestor of
the queen, was really about,
he really wanted to be
King Arthur himself.
And he wanted to be him
politically and actually.
So of course he went
into those countries.
He took away their
holy relics, which
were associated with Arthur.
So the battle helm, the
taliath of the Welsh princes
was something that he took
and put in his treasury,
which was supposed--
>> REGINA: So that makes sense.
>>MATTHEWS: --to be an Arthurian
legend, an Arthurian artifact.
And in Scotland he
took away the Stone
of Stane, the Stone of Scuin
on which the kings were
inaugurated.
So he was taking all those
artifacts to himself.
And of course his grandson
makes a round table at Windsor.
>> REGINA: Yes, I've seen
the round table at Windsor.
>> MATTHEWS: But it goes, but
of course the actual round table
ends up in sort of Winchester.
>> REGINA: In
Winchester, exactly.
>> MATTHEWS: So we kind of see
the Norman kings themselves--
>> REGINA: To the train station.
>> MATTHEWS: They become
very invested in this.
Let's be the very best kings we
can in the way of King Arthur.
So they're purloining
the legend.
>> REGINA: Through myth.
And yet at the
same time sometimes
there are great souls
who come through.
And they do inspire people
in that way in every age.
And this myth can be overlaid
and applied to that character.
Now we'll dive into the
breadcrumbs or the bits
of evidence on the trail.
And the historical face,
the oldest historical face,
as you say in your
book, appeared
in the second century
among Roman soldiers
occupying Britain.
In the name as Lucius
Artorius Castus.
So let's talk about
this character.
>>MATTHEWS: He's the
first of the name Artorius
that we can find in
terms of evidence.
And of course he was
a Roman commander.
And he commanded a
group of Sarmatians.
The thing that
the Romans did was
that whenever they
went into a province,
they didn't recruit people
to the army in that country.
But they recruited
them into the army
and sent them somewhere else.
So they could go and bother
some other country really.
And so the Sarmatians, who
in that meeting of Asia,--
so sort of where
Chechnya is now--
come to Britain.
And they're stationed here.
And they're stationed
along Hadrian's Wall.
And they're also stationed
just above the area
around Cheshire now.
And his name is the
very first that comes.
But where the myth comes in here
is that the Sarmatian people
had their own legends,
which of course become
very familiar to us suddenly.
Because we hear
about a hero called
Batraz, who has a sword which is
thrown into a lake, and so on.
So we have all kind of
quite interesting legends
which suddenly come into
this country via that way.
And one of John's theories is
that the Lucius Artorius legend
could well be a precursor
for what we understand
as the Dark Age Arthur.
And we know what Lucius
Artorius' achievements
were because a monument was
found in what's now Croatia.
And John was responsible,
among many others,
to help its conservation.
But it actually lists
all his achievements.
So we know a little
bit more about him.
>> REGINA: So a heroic
figure of the day.
>> MATTHEWS: So he's a
commander of Sarmatian troops.
And there he is.
And we know very little more
about him in that respect.
>> REGINA: Other
than he was there.
>> MATTHEWS: Yes, he was there.
>> REGINA: And then there's
another character that pops up
in the fifth century.
Can you draw a line between
the second century character?
>> MATTHEWS: So we don't
really in a direct way.
But as I say, we have
the Saxon incursion.
Suddenly we have people
coming in boatloads,
first of all, warriors, and
then when they've settled in,
coming back with
their families--
so really meaning
to settle here.
And so, of course,
that displaces so much
of the population.
They settled here in London.
They settled along the east
coast, of East Anglia, Norfolk,
and right the way up the
east coast of Britain,
and gradually tried to
move into the areas which
were occupied by Britons.
And so there was quite
a fierce resistance.
And in some places they
were very successful.
And the places where,
that held out the longest
were the ones with the center
and the west of the island.
And it said in the
Welsh documents
that Arthur fights 12 battles.
So we can identify some of them.
And others we can't
with great certainty.
But it looks as
though he's ranging
a whole series of campaigns
across the country
right the way up to what we
now think of as Scotland.
>> REGINA: As Scotland, yes,
OK, and going back to Artorius,
Castus, who were the
so-called lizard people?
What was that about?
>> MATTHEWS: The way that the
Sarmatians armored themselves
with these overlapping leaps
of armors so they looked like
lizard scales.
And so of course in armor
making, that's very good armor.
That's very defensive armor.
And the people who have
that on their bodies
and not easily penetrated by
arrows or swords or spears.
So they were also of course,
they rode on horseback.
So they were mounted cavalry.
So they were formidable foes.
>> REGINA: And how did
this start filtering
into the Arthurian
dragon symbolism?
>> MATTHEWS: Well,
we wonder about this
because the Sarmatians
had a standard,
which was like a wind sock.
But it was in dragon form.
And so the dragon becomes
embedded in British history
in two different ways.
It becomes on one
side the emblem
of Wales, which is the
remnant of Britain.
The Welsh people are
the original Britons.
And they have that
is their emblem.
And it also comes into
the royal house of Wessex.
So somewhere along the
line, someone from Britain
married some Saxons, who were
getting quite successful.
And then that becomes,
the area of Wessex
is what we would largely regard
as the south of England now.
And that was also
their emblem as well.
So we think this quite possibly
a transmission from the wind
sock banner through to the--
>> REGINA: From the Welsh,
you had the scale like armor.
And you had the wind sock.
And you start getting this
little portrait of dragons
and this kind of
reptile presence.
>> MATTHEWS: The sense of the
energies of the land is also
being dragon like.
I think that does come
down in myth very well
in the story of Merlin, who
is of course, in British,
he's Myrddin Emrys.
And he is the one that,
when King Vortigen, who
is one of those kings who
arises in the wake of the Romans
leaving and the Saxons coming
in, tries to build a tower.
And his tower
keeps falling down.
And he asks druids,
so what we do
to stop the tower falling down?
Because there's
obviously something
magical going on here.
And his druids
say, well, you must
find a boy that has no father.
And so of course they go out.
They scour the land.
And they come across a little
group of boys playing ball.
And at the end of the game, some
of the boys turn on one of them
and say, you've
not got a father.
And they think, oh, great.
We don't have to
look any further.
Here he is.
And of course it's Myrddin.
And Myrddin is dragged
back to the town
to be sacrificed by the druids.
Because they thought, well,
if we lay a nice foundation
sacrifice, of course
the tower will stand up.
But Myrddin steps forward
and says, excuse me.
Your tower keeps falling down.
Do you know why?
And of course the druids have
not said what is causing it.
He says, I know
what is causing it.
It is the two dragons underneath
the ground who are causing that
by their eternal fighting.
>> REGINA: His life was saved.
>> MATTHEWS: It's like Jesus
in the temple with the doctors.
He's a bit wiser
than the wise man.
And so, of course, then
the dragons come forth.
And Myrddin becomes the
prophet of the Pendragons
of the line of Arthur.
>> REGINA: We'll go to
that in a moment too.
Which part of the,
which years are we
speaking about when this part
of the story comes to the fore?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, this legend
comes up both in the work
of Nennius--
so it is an eighth
century curricular
and of course, it's
spun, yet again,
by Geoffrey of
Monmouth, who's writing
in the early 12th century.
So those legends are
boiling up all the time.
>> REGINA: And people
love the story of Merlin.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, yes.
I mean, he's actually, if
you look at the record,
he's probably much
more associated with--
there may be two Myrddins,
of course, as well.
There's Myrddin Emrys, who is
associated with that dragon
story.
And there's a
Myrddin Wyllt, who's
really to do with the northern
kingdoms of Britain, who
runs mad after the Battle
of Arfderydd in 587.
So we know, we have the poems
from that particular Myrddin.
>> REGINA: Well, there's no
recorded physical evidence
of Arthur in the fifth
and sixth century.
That's where it seems to
be set a lot of the time.
And why is that?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, I think
that particular period is
the unknown period.
We have documentation
of the Romans obviously.
And the people here in
Britain were Christians
before the Saxon incursion.
So there were clerics here.
And they were writing.
But of course they were
not writing anything
about people they
didn't approve of.
And we get the
feeling that, from one
of those clerics,
Gildas, who leaves
us a testimony of the
terrible things that
are going on in Britain
at the time of the Saxons.
He very carefully does
not mention Arthur.
He mentions someone
called on Ambrosius.
Yes, which of course
is another name,
Emrys and Ambrosius
are the same name.
So we wonder very much
what boils up from there.
So there's a lot
of innuendo and--
>> REGINA: Hint.
>> MATTHEWS: --suggestion.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
little suggestion.
>> MATTHEWS: So it's like trying
to reconstruct present history
from a future time by a few
emails, a couple of letters,
and someone's half
burnt document.
It's quite hard.
>> REGINA: Oh, absolutely, thus
it's taken 55 years of hunting
on the part of your husband.
>> MATTHEWS: It's a long time.
>> REGINA: Absolutely, and
now let's bring in the symbol
of the rose, which was very
important in Roman history
and Christian history as well,
but also the notion of chivalry
and how this came
into the story.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, the
chivalric entry of things
into the equation really
comes in the medieval period.
And it's beginning to,
it comes, to some extent
the Arthurian legends are
like the oldest running soap
in the world.
Yes, the way one
script writer dies.
Another one comes along.
And the story is continued.
And so of course, we
get the biggest upsurge
of things in the, really
in the 12th century when
people are really interested.
I suppose there's that
sort of thing that
happens that when a people
have been knocked back
and are no longer--
>> REGINA: Tell us what was
happening in the 12th century.
>> MATTHEWS: In the 12th
century we have the Norman king.
So we have the--
1066, we have William
the Conqueror comes over.
And he puts down
the Saxon kings.
So we have a completely
different form of rulership,
which is much more aggressive.
Because the Normans were
Vikings originally of course.
So they come in.
And they really impose
their hand upon the land.
So other things are happening.
The language of the
administration is French.
It's not English.
So there are a whole lot of
different things going on.
And France and England
are much more close.
So the, sometimes the kings
of England lived here.
Sometimes they lived in France.
For them it was the same because
it was all their kingdoms.
But the storytellers
of that time
are beginning to look back
at the culture that was here,
by which time it's become cute.
>> REGINA: Cute?
>> MATTHEWS: You
know what happens?
In the same way that
people look back at,
people in the 20th century
look back to the 19th century
and say--
>> REGINA: How charming.
>> MATTHEWS: Wow, these Native
Americans look really cute.
Yes, you know, there's that
horrible thing that goes on.
A people has been colonized
and horribly put down.
And then suddenly
we have a very--
but of course we can look back
at those stories and think,
well, they were so wonderful.
So a similar thing
begins to happen there.
But then of course
they re-spin it
again so that now all
of Arthur's warriors
become knights.
And Arthur, rather than
being a battle leader,
a dux bellorum, in
the Roman fashion,
has become a medieval King.
So there's this whole
different thing going on.
>> REGINA: Because
they're charmed by it.
>> MATTHEWS: They
are charmed by it.
>> REGINA: They're looking back
on it as an enchanted period.
>> MATTHEWS: It is.
So it's already mythic to them,
which is very interesting.
But it has to be mythic in
the clothing of the time.
>> REGINA: Tell us again what
was not charming about that
era.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, when William
the Conqueror landed and did
his conquest, he put down
what virtually is the whole
of Yorkshire.
So there was just a
massacre and most people.
And that was called the
Harrowing of the North.
And at the end of
his life, he actually
built Battle Abbey in
penance for the number
of people that were
not just killed
at battle around Hastings
but also the people who
were killed in the north.
So the Doomsday Book was
made, which literally
meant that
administrators went round
to every village, every town,
every farm and settlement
and said, five cows, three
bondwomen, five pigs.
So everything, they knew
exactly what everyone had
and how they could tax it.
So it was a taxation
machine, which
was why it was called the
Doomsday Book because,
and that would run forever.
>> REGINA: Yes,
still does, really.
>> MATTHEWS: And still today the
people to whom William assigned
the land and gave titles, about
the same number of people still
own that land today
or their descendants.
>> REGINA: Yes, well, other
people who chronicled what was
going on and kept track
of things were the monks.
And fortunately we
had literate monks
who were able to write down
the histories, the characters
of the day, and
what was going on.
So here, we come
to a figure named
Arthur, a battle leader
against the Saxons,
who slayed 960
men single handed.
And this was written
down by a monk.
So let's talk about his
rendering of an Arthur
who was this great
leader in battle.
>> MATTHEWS: So we have a lot
of chronicles of the later time.
So we have Nennius.
We have Gildas, who does
not talk about Arthur very
carefully.
But he's living nearer to the
first incursions of the Saxons.
Nennius is writing in the
eighth century, by which time
the Welsh kingdoms
were still existent.
But the Norman kingdoms were
about to be coming along
quite soon.
So there was Saxons and
British living side by side.
Then you come into
the Norman era.
We just have a whole lot
of other things going on.
So we have the, suddenly
there's a necessity
for the churches, who've had
Saxon incumbents, to suddenly
prove that they have a charter
to the land that they have.
And so one of the
things that they do
is that they suddenly come
up with stories of Arthur.
King Arthur gave it
to our descendants,
the forebears of our abbey.
And that abbot signed an
agreement with Arthur.
And here are some legends.
So there was quite a lot of
what I would call "back proving"
the evidence.
>> REGINA: Right, to maintain--
>> MATTHEWS: In order
to maintain their title
to the church or
abbey that they had.
>> REGINA: So it wasn't just
this pure documentation.
>> MATTHEWS: Oh,
no, so it was like,
but of course no one
can argue with the myth.
>> REGINA: That's true.
>> MATTHEWS: Yes, And so if you
have a nice aged document that
says King Arthur allowed the
former abbot to have this
land--
>> REGINA: Or in
the hand of a monk.
>> MATTHEWS: Yes,
and it's the church.
So who can--
>> REGINA: Who can
argue against that?
>> MATTHEWS: Indeed.
>> REGINA: Exactly, OK, there's
another 10th century text that
talks about his
conquest at Badon.
Do you say Bad-on?
>> MATTHEWS: Bay-den.
>> REGINA: Bay-den.
>> MATTHEWS: The
battle of Badon.
>> REGINA: And his death in 537.
But this comes along with the
death of Mordred, who's also
been memorialized in the story.
So let's talk about
who Mordred was.
>> MATTHEWS: There
were two versions.
The earlier version
of Mordred, who
in British is called Medraut.
So Medraut is no
apparent relation
of Arthur in that earlier story.
He's just someone who's
adversarial against him.
In order to, the
consistent story
that runs between the
early one and the Mordred
that we know from the later
Arthurian legends, where
he's become the nephew
of Arthur, is Guinevere.
>> REGINA: Say this again.
>> MATTHEWS: So Guinevere
is the glue between the two
characters.
So in some of the
earlier legends,
Medraut comes into court.
And he takes his cup of wine.
And he pours it down
the queen's front.
So he deeply insults her.
And so this is the earliest
play for Guinevere that we have.
If we go to the
French writer, Wace,
who's talking later
on about Mordred,
while Arthur is
out of the country
prosecuting wars abroad,
Mordred comes along
and seizes Guinevere.
And he takes her to the Tower of
London just up the river here.
And there he keeps her
prisoner, because he's
intending to marry her himself.
So it's very interesting.
So it was, I think--
>> REGINA: Obviously
not consensually.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, we never
hear about what Guinevere thinks
about anything.
But of course the earlier
the British Guinevere
is Gwenevere, which
is her British name.
And she's very interesting
in her own right.
She is very likely
the one through whom
the sovereignty
of the land runs.
There are lots of legends
about the goddess of the land
in Britain and Ireland.
They concern the
goddess of the land who
allows someone to be the ruler.
She recognizes in him
the correct prescription
for kingship or rulership.
And so every king rules with
her consent, as it were.
And even today in the marriage
right, in the coronation right,
the monarch is formally given
the wedding ring of England.
So that's put on their hand.
So there's a still, it's a
similar sense of, if you're
the ruler of the land,
you are also responsible
to it as well as for it.
So that's still understood
in the coronation right.
So Guinevere may in
these early times
have possessed that
sense of sovereignty,
that if you married her,
you married the land.
Whoever held Guinevere
holds the land.
Which makes her interesting
in a slightly different way.
>> REGINA: Very interesting,
now has she also appeared
peripherally in your research
or directly as an archetypal
figure that pops up
throughout British history?
>> MATTHEWS: Yes, she is really,
the earliest mention that we
have of her is in
"The Mabinogion"
in the story of "Culhwch and
Olwen" where she appears.
She is mentioned as--
>> REGINA: When is that?
>> MATTHEWS: Arthur's wife.
So the, we have a transcription
of "Culhwch and Olwen" from,
it's about the
10th, 11th century.
But it's a writing
down of something
that's a much earlier story.
We can tell from looking at it.
It's obviously come out of
the oral Bardic storytelling
tradition because of the
way the language runs.
You can hear it's
a Bardic rendition.
And there she's just
mentioned as Arthur's wife.
So it's the very
first mention of her.
And she doesn't really
come into the legends
again until very much later.
So we hear more about her
in the medieval period.
>> REGINA: So going back
to the notion of the symbol
of the rose and chivalry and
now that we have Guinevere
introduced, where does the
character Lancelot begin
appearing?
>> MATTHEWS: Lancelot
comes in very late.
So he's not an early--
>> REGINA: He's a
later construct--
>> MATTHEWS: He's a very
much later construct.
>> REGINA: --that really
supports the chivalrous part
of the story.
>> MATTHEWS: He is.
He's the very perfect,
gentle knight.
And he comes from France.
He has a whole series of
stories all about himself.
And of course one
of the ones we don't
hear from the major
legends, but which
comes in a wonderful story
which is called "Lancelot,"
is that when he
was a baby, there
was a fire at the castle
where he was born.
And his mother and father
run out of the castle.
And his mother lays him on the
ground and goes, oh my God.
The castle's burning down.
And she's not looking.
But the Lady of the Lake
comes out of the lake
and takes the baby and takes
it to be raised in Fairyland.
And he's, there he's taught
absolutely everything
a young man should be
taught except chivalry.
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting.
OK, there's a little
twist on our story.
>> MATTHEWS: So he learns all
the arts of fairy but none
of the arts of war.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> MATTHEWS: Yes, isn't it?
He can hunt and fish and
shoot and be kind to ladies,
and all those things.
And so, of course,
he's coming out
of a very different box than
all these other worriers.
So you can understand how he
might be appealing in that way.
>> REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
Well, and since
you brought her up,
let's talk about the Lady
of the Lake for a moment.
Because in the modern day lore,
of course the Lady of the Lake
has the knowledge.
The Excalibur is
thrown into the lake.
>> MATTHEWS: Yeah.
Well, the Lady of the
Lake, who comes, of course,
into the medieval legends.
She is really modeling the
queen of the other world.
And we would not think of
her as the queen of Faerie.
But she's the queen
of the other world.
And she has that wisdom.
The sword that--
Arthur gets two swords.
He gets the sword that he
pulls from the stone, which
is-- because of course
the stone allows the sword
to be pulled from the stone.
>> REGINA: And we're going to
talk about that a little bit
in terms of where
that story came in.
>> MATTHEWS: But the second
sword that he has is the sword
that comes from the lake.
And the sword that
comes from the lake
is ritually given to him by the
Lady of the Lake in the legend.
And of course, so at the end of
his life, when he has his wound
and he's not going
to get better,
he asks for the sword to be
given back to her because it
can't be passed on.
It's not his to give.
It has to go back to
the goddess of the land.
So we're back to that goddess
of sovereignty story yet again.
>> REGINA: Yeah, that
part's fascinating.
OK, so how did the
Knights of the Round Table
come into the story?
And what era are we
talking about then?
>> MATTHEWS: OK, so in
"Culhwch and Olwen,"
the story I mentioned earlier,
which is an early British
story--
so I would imagine that that's
probably, in its essence,
it's probably sixth century,
in terms of its content.
--nearly 300 warriors of
Arthur are named by name.
So it's a very long list.
And some we would recognize.
So there are people like
Kai, whom we know as Kay.
And there is Bedwyr,
whom we know as Bedivere,
and a lot of other British names
that people wouldn't recognize.
And it mentions the whole
of Arthur's household
in this story.
These knights, some of them
come forward very strongly.
So Kay becomes Arthur's
foster brother in the story
and a bit of a lout.
He's supposed to be the butler.
He's the one that's responsible
for the pouring of the wine.
But he's also the one that
sometimes doesn't welcome
people to court very well.
We get Bedivere becoming much
more of a companion to Arthur,
and then this whole
other chivalric, knights
who come to be part
of the Round Table.
>> REGINA: And where in this
lineage of myths and stories do
Merlin and Arthur hook up?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, so Merlin
has a whole separate set
of stories.
And they become married to
the Arthurian legend sometime
between the sixth century
and the later centuries.
And the first person
who picks up on him
again is, Nennius mentions
the legends of Merlin
in the eighth century.
And then Geoffrey
of Monmouth, who's
really a British storyteller and
cleric, who picks up on that.
And that's the version
that the Norman court gets.
So those are wound together in
Geoffrey of Monmouth's "Vita
Merlini," "The Life of Merlin."
And you get him
reminiscing about things
after he's run mad.
When he's recovered
his wits again,
he speaks of his
time with Arthur
and how he and the poet Taliesin
took Arthur over to Avalon
in a boat.
>> REGINA: Yes, is there
evidence that this actually did
occur?
>> MATTHEWS: I don't think
we're talking about historical
events.
We're talking about
mythic events.
>> REGINA: --marriage
of characters,
of archetypal characters.
>> MATTHEWS: They just, the
two stories just converge.
And they're joined really
firmly by Geoffrey of Monmouth,
who also writes a history
of the kings of Britain.
And so he is Welsh.
So he can sew all these
things together pretty well.
>> REGINA: Yes, the bards,
the top bards of the planet.
>> MATTHEWS: And he's
well-placed for everyone
to hear them.
So of course everyone
gets to hear them.
>> REGINA: Yes, of course,
OK, let's go into, do you say,
Chretien de Troyes?
>> MATTHEWS: Chretien, yeah.
>> REGINA: Chretien de Troyes.
Let's get into his work, because
that's the first time the word
"Camelot" starts appearing.
Right?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, it begins
to pile up around that time.
>> REGINA: No, the cast of
characters have already been
introduced by this time.
>> MATTHEWS: So we have--
>> REGINA: This is
twelfth century.
>> MATTHEWS:
--Chretien introduces--
in the 12th century, he
introduces quite a few things.
He introduces the Grail
legend for the first time.
There are obviously lots
of different references
that precede it.
But that's the first Grail
story, the story of the Grail.
And he also tells stories
of Arthur's nights, which
are obviously known from
Welsh tradition, on which he
has picked up on.
Because the thing that
we keep forgetting,
the thing that ties all
these things together
and which we can't see because
it's happening backstage,
is that the Normans
didn't speak English.
And the Normans did
not speak Welsh.
And so what they
really were using,
in terms of speaking to
people, they used Latin most.
People who spoke Latin,
English, French, Norman
French, and Welsh.
So these were the people
who were pinning everything
together, holding the
administration together.
Because you have to be
able to talk to people
that you've conquered.
>> REGINA: Absolutely, you
have to tell them what to do.
>> MATTHEWS: And also, but
stories are coming back from
the British and Welsh tradition
into the Norman courts via
these people.
>> REGINA: That's interesting
because you say that the way
the British perceived Arthur
versus the way the French
perceived Arthur are
two different things.
And tell us about that.
>> MATTHEWS: They are.
So for the British, Arthur
is the great commander
who's going to come again,
and he's going to throw off.
There's a poem called
"Armor's Prydein," which
speaks of all
those who have been
lost as a result of
the Saxon incursion.
And the poem ends
with "and a candle
in the dark we'll go with them."
So there's this
great hiraeth, which
is what the Welsh call
this longing for something
that you can't have,
which is lost and gone.
But you still have that longing.
>> REGINA: I think
everyone can relate.
>> MATTHEWS: I think if you
look at any country around
the world, if there's
a, even the Balkan war.
You could see that the
oil boiled out exactly
at the same time
as events that had
happened on exactly the same
day in the 14th century.
So the memory is very long.
And if you go to
Wales, people will
Instilled regard themselves
as the true people of Britain,
which of course they are.
>> REGINA: Well, they are.
And I did a little trek
and got lost along the way.
It was absolutely
beautiful and wonderful
looking for the castle
of Merlin in Wales.
And what is that, the
remnants of those stones?
Who actually occupied that?
>> MATTHEWS: So Dinas Emrys,
which is in North Wales
in Snowdonia, there are
some castellated remains,
which are pretty ruinous now.
And you can climb
up and look at them.
But they are from a later era.
They're from the Norman era.
Because the Normans built
more castles in Wales
than anywhere else.
And they built those castles
to subdue the people.
That's what that's a remnant of.
So Dinas Emrys is
the place that's
mentioned as the
Tower of Vortigern.
That's that place.
>> REGINA: When I went there,
I didn't really understand any
of the back story of it.
And I will say, anyone who
chooses to go there, waterfalls
and green and ancient walls.
It's worth the trek.
It's so beautiful.
But the signage is horrible.
It goes like this.
I followed every sign perfectly
and ended up like this.
>> MATTHEWS: That's fine.
A lot of people don't find
Dinas Emrys as a result of that.
But of course Merlin's town
is Carmarthen, which is,
that's actually what it means.
It means "Merlin's town."
>> REGINA: I wish I'd read this
and talked to you beforehand.
>> MATTHEWS: And that's
in South Wales, of course.
>> REGINA: Well, I
couldn't recommend it more.
Wales is so beautiful.
And that area of Wales
is absolutely gorgeous
and enchanting in its own right.
The trees talk to you there.
Anyway, we'll get off of that.
So in essence this story
of, the Arthurian legend,
these parallels with
Jesus, the Prince of Peace,
elevated to a regal status,
devoted acolytes, the death
by betrayal of one's own.
These again--
>> MATTHEWS: And he's
born of a virgin.
Born of a virgin.
>> REGINA: There you go.
These are really
parallel stories.
>> MATTHEWS: A strange
birth which is engineered.
So it's not clear whose
father he really has.
And these are the elements
of archetypal mythic pattern,
which we recognize, that
nearly everyone has some,
it's going to be
notable mythically.
They have a very strange birth,
which is surrounded by mystery.
We don't know.
They have a different
kind of upbringing,
all of these things.
>> REGINA: So so many searches
have been launched as a result
of the various parts of this
legend, particularly the grail.
And we have many British
authors, including the late Sir
Laurence Gardner,
who has written
about the search for the grail.
So in your own research and
your husband's research as well,
what is the grail?
What does the grail represent?
>> MATTHEWS: The grail is a
halo of great virtue that brings
healing.
But it's not a physical object
that can be curated in a museum
or like at the end of the
Indiana Jones first movie,
stored in--
>> REGINA: It's not a chalice.
>> MATTHEWS: No, no, it's
not something that can be
discovered.
And I think it's one
of those myths that
has a very distinct
pattern, that wherever
you go in to look at it,
that it has this sense of,
first of all, there was
a wonderful time of peace
and plenty.
And then something
terrible happened.
And this something
terrible causes the land
to lie waist and for the
fertility of the land
to be completely overrun.
The waters withdraw.
Everything is pretty bad.
And then within that
time, visions of the grail
begin to appear.
So people say, why
are things like this?
What can we do about it?
They begin to ask questions.
And I think of all the
things in the grail legend,
it's this question that's
the most important.
And it's the one that's very
relevant to our own time
of course.
When we start to ask
questions about things,
then of course things
begin to change.
We're able to begin to
assess where we stand
and what we can do
about it and to draw
upon the powers that
will actually help
things to be restored again.
And that's exactly what happens.
Those that are called
upon to, by that vision,
go out on quest.
And they begin to set right the
wrongs that have taken place.
>> REGINA: And in
addition to all that,
which is absolutely
beautiful, we have,
I recently interviewed
Freddy Silva,
another British author who
lives in America at this time.
Who, he takes the story
into the Knight Templar.
Because oftentimes
this, the Templar,
the Knight Templar start
becoming implicated
in the Arthurian story as well.
But he has done his
own exhaustive research
in terms of their relationship
with the Cistercian monks
and with France and Portugal.
And what those monks had access
to by way of this incredible,
you could say, druidic knowledge
of the nature of reality.
Because again we have to
remember that the druids were
very highly esteemed.
The British Royalty
used the druids
by their side to make decisions
of importance, for example,
or to lay out the best
configuration of time
when something should be done.
They were their advisors.
So if you're looking at it
through that perspective,
they're saying that
the holy grail,
or he's come to the position
that the holy grail is
that knowledge that they
were trying to protect,
which is the knowledge
of our own beings
being able to traverse into
the highest aspect of ourselves
and our understanding
and draw from that.
And it happens in stories of
Resurrection, for example.
So it's interesting
because it dovetails
in with this deep, psychological
need for this healing
and this merging
with this higher
aspect of all, of
the larger mind
and ourselves on our own
scale of consciousness.
So we can begin the
healing process again.
>> MATTHEWS: Yeah, I think,
what caused us to go on quest is
everyone's story.
We all have to go on a quest.
And what we find brings us to
different places within it.
And sometimes we become,
as like the Knights,
staging post for others
who are also on quest.
So our experiences can lead
and open doorways for that.
And some people really do
achieve extraordinary things
for our world that we may not
give them cups and medals.
We may not know who
those people are.
It's like that, the legend, the
Jewish legend of the just man.
Someone said to me
once, so how many
just men do you think
there are at the moment
keeping the world?
I said, enough that we wouldn't
be having this conversation.
So somewhere out there
doing their own thing
but not for themselves,
and I that's
the really important thing.
That the quest that we're
talking about is not a,
oh, I'm going to make it all
the way to nirvana and back
and bring back the award.
Is that these quests
are those that
move into that hinterland
between our world and the other
and begin to sew
them back together.
Because that's,
it's the unsewing
of the world that
is the problem--
the two sides of reality
that needs to be as one.
And when they begin to pull
apart like any garment,
we begin to feel very
uncertain about it.
So the grail always
appears at that point.
And when we get things back
together again, it disappears.
It is withdrawn.
>> REGINA: Beautifully put.
>> MATTHEWS: It is withdrawn.
And so it's, as I say, it's not,
it's the finger and the moon,
isn't it?
It's not the grail that
we're in quest for.
It's the, what's
the grail brings.
And it's always this
vessel of healing.
>> REGINA: Absolutely, and
that's just so beautifully
stated.
Let's go to English knight, Sir
Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel.
You say, one of the greatest
pieces of writing in English.
Tell us about the subject
and why you consider it so.
>> MATTHEWS: So Sir Thomas
Malory spent considerable
periods in prison.
We should be very
clear about this,
probably for rape and pillage
and for various other things.
But of course in medieval
times there was always, always
had recourse to confession.
And so you could
clean up your act.
So he obviously had a very
deep seated sense of honor.
And for him, his
immediate background
would have been the
background of Henry V
and the War of
Agincourt and so on.
So that would have been very
closely in his mind, I think.
For him that was his
historical period.
And he wrote down
the legends of Arthur
using the Cistercian versions
of the Arthurian legends.
So there's, so what's called
the Prose Lancelot and all
the stories to do
with the grail,
he made a version of them,
which was a very British version
in of course that beautiful
late 15th century English, which
we can still read.
It's not too difficult to read.
And the things that
move him are the kinds
of things that move soldiers
and warriors everywhere,
which is that they feel
for their companions.
They feel the injustice of
what's going on in the world.
And so he presents this
incredibly noble, incredibly
honorable set of men who
are fighting the worst
kind of people in the world.
Yes, the villains
are very villainous.
>> REGINA: Barbarians.
>> MATTHEWS: They are indeed.
They prison ladies
and beat them up
and do all sorts
of terrible things.
And so we get this
ultimate flowering
of the romantic chivalry
that has been associated
with Arthur over so many years.
And he presents this
most extraordinary story,
which of course begins
to come up to the grail.
And the grail legend in
Malory is of course the sign
that everything is going
to go to hell in a handcart
very soon.
Because of course all the
Knights leave Camelot.
They go out on the grail quest.
Very few come back.
And the whole administration
begins to be very rocky.
And so of course the
title of this book
is the "Morte d'Arthur."
And the very last part of the
story is the death of Arthur
and how he is betrayed and
how Guinevere and Lancelot are
betrayed by the Orkney clan.
And it ends up with
Lancelot fighting
against his very best
friend, King Arthur.
So it's a very sad love
triangle in that story.
But he still somehow brings
that story up another notch.
Because when Arthur at the
end is fighting Mordred,
he does not die.
He passes out of this
life into another manner.
And as he says, I shall not
say that King Arthur is dead.
>> REGINA: I get chills
again when you say that.
And if you're looking at it
as one big metaphor, when
you talk about the knights
going out and very few
returning, when it comes
to that journey of marrying
the higher and the lower
minds within ourselves,
within our own
journeying, it's very rare
that a person actually
indeed completes that journey
and really integrates.
>> MATTHEWS: Well, I think
the thing that, as I say,
I've said before, is that
this is not our quest.
It's not our individual
quest that matters.
It is our collective
And I know that Joseph Campbell
spoke about finding your myth
and living your myth and so on.
But actually we don't
live it for ourselves.
We live it for others.
And I think for Arthur
that's really true.
>> REGINA: Yes, and yet we as
individuals want to participate
in the story.
And so we want to
find our own way.
And the thing that's
beautiful about this
is because you're talking about
human virtues basically, valor
and courage and devotion and
love and all of these things
that have become
synonymous with legend.
Those virtues are things that
we are trying to now wake up
to and reinstill.
So there are many people who
have gone on this journey
and not made it back.
The opportunity to
go on that journey
and make it through now,
individually and collectively,
I'd say we're closer to than we
have been in hundreds of years.
>>MATTHEWS: There is
always hope for everything.
I would never say, never.
>> REGINA: Absolutely, so
looking at from a pop culture
point of view, lots of
books have been written,
making movies, TV miniseries,
full length series,
and so forth have been made
about the life of King Arthur
and Guinevere and so forth.
Are there any that
you actually enjoyed?
Or is there one you
might prefer over others?
>> MATTHEWS: Well, no.
>> REGINA: I thought that
might be your answer.
>> MATTHEWS: I'll be very
clear about that, no.
So John is a much
fairer man than me.
He's fair to a fault. And he'll
always find something to enjoy.
>> REGINA: So what
would he recommend?
>> MATTHEWS: So he will always
find something good to say.
But no, I haven't personally
enjoyed them a great deal.
I think of the things
that have happened
in the last few decades.
And John Boorman's
"Excalibur" I did enjoy.
It was completely over the
top and down the other side.
But it dealt with
the myth very well.
And so when the myth
is not well handled,
when it comes into a very
paltry level of expression,
I'm not so keen.
>> REGINA: So in the
end, King Arthur is.
>> MATTHEWS: The myth
has to speak for itself.
And if the myth isn't
allowed to speak
or it's been put into a very
low position in the story,
the story doesn't come over.
The storytelling
doesn't come over.
It's the myth that excites us.
>> REGINA: But it doesn't mean
that historical personages,
that they have found remains
of, that there are little
references to and such,
those people existed.
And that people have
attributed those traits to them
is part of the myth, right?
>> MATTHEWS: Oh, yes,
this happens all the time.
It's a myth that is given
to being appropriated.
>> REGINA: So how has this
journey affected yours
and John's life, particularly
John since it's been his
lifelong passion?
>> MATTHEWS: It's been
the ongoing focus.
And it's the thing we've
shared most together.
So we both worked
in the library.
And we obviously saw each
other but didn't know much
about each other.
I went into the library one day.
And he was talking in
the canteen to someone
about the Mabinogion,
the early Welsh
legends, which of course
some of which are Arthurian.
And I overheard
them and said, oh, I
know about the Mabinogion.
And so it was actually the
cause of our coming together.
>> REGINA: So this has been
a very important page indeed.
>> MATTHEWS: It's been quite
an important story for us.
>> REGINA: Well, we only
have another, just a minute.
And you've written a couple
of other books recently
of other subjects that
have fascinated you.
Just give us a little
tease about what you're
doing right now, where you are.
>> MATTHEWS: OK, so I have
lots of hats and write lots
of different, about
different topics and so on.
So the book that's coming
out is the last book
of the grail, which John
and I have written together.
So we've actually,
with Gareth Knight,
have translated a
13th century grail
text called "The
Elucidation," which
is an alternative version of
the grail story, which tells us
about how the
wasteland came about
and what we can do about it.
So I'm really, really happy
that that book is coming out.
That's been five years on
the road and a lot of work.
So I hope people are
going to be excited
at the new research in that.
>> REGINA: Well, we have
something wonderful to look
forward to.
So Caitlin, thank you
so much for joining us.
And I have to say, I
have all these years
thought your name is Caitlin.
Because in America, we
take this lovely name.
And we call it Caitlin.
But it's not.
The Welsh pronunciation--
>> MATTHEWS: No, it's Gaelic.
>> REGINA: The Gaelic
pronunciation is "Kathleen."
>> MATTHEWS: It's "Kathleen."
>> REGINA: It's Kathleen, OK.
So even though I'm saying,
I think her name's Caitlin.
[LAUGHTER]
You corrected me.
>> MATTHEWS: Thank
you for getting that.
>> REGINA: Thank you
so much, Kathleen,
for taking the time to come
and join us here in London.
I hope you found this
conversation absolutely
fascinating, even if it may have
dashed your previous beliefs.
The title of the book is called
"The Complete King Arthur,"
which you can find
at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
in London for "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]